---
date created: 2021-10-22 18:19
date updated: 2021-11-01 12:19

---

#GS-I #Modern-History/Pre #Modern-History/FS #Modern-History/Post

## Syllabus

- Modern Indian history from about the middle of the eighteenth century until the presentsignificant events, personalities, issues.
- The Freedom Struggle — its various stages and important contributors/contributions from different parts of the country.
- Post-independence consolidation and reorganization within the country.

## BookList

- [[@/Resources/History/NCERT-8.pdf|NCERT-8]]

**Modern History (Pre Independence)**

- [[@/Resources/History/New NCERT/NCERT-12.3.pdf|Themes in Indian History Part III]]
- [[@/Resources/History/India's Struggle for Independence by Bipan Chandra.pdf|India's Struggle for Independence by Bipan Chandra]]

**Modern History (Post Independence)**

- [[@/Resources/Political Science/NCERT-12.2.pdf|Politics after Independence NCERT XII]]
- [[@/Resources/History/India Since Independence by Bipin Chandra.pdf|India Since Independence by Bipin Chandra]] (Chapter 6-12)

[[@/Resources/History/A Brief History of Modern India by Rajiv Ahir.pdf|A Brief History of Modern India by Rajiv Ahir]] for a revised study

## Footnotes

## Questions

### Modern History (Pre Independence)

1. Throw light on the significance of the thoughts of Mahatma Gandhi in the present times. 2018
2. Clarify how mid-eighteenth century India was beset with the spectre of a fragmented polity. 2017
3. Why did the ‘Moderates’ fail to carry conviction with the nation about their proclaimed ideology and political goals by the end of the nineteenth century? 2017
4. Examine how the decline of traditional artisanal industry in colonial India crippled the rural economy. 2017
5. The women’s questions arose in modern India as a part of the 19th century social reform movement. What were the major issues and debates concerning women in that period? 2017
6. Highlight the importance of the new objectives that got added to the vision of Indian independence since twenties of the last century. 2017
7. Explain how the Uprising of 1857 constitutes an important watershed in the evolution of British policies towards colonial India. 2016
8. Discuss the role of women in the freedom struggle especially during the Gandhian phase. 2016
9. Highlight the differences in the approach of Subhash Chandra Bose and Mahatma Gandhi in the struggle for freedom. 2016
10. How different would have been the achievement of Indian independence without Mahatma Gandhi? Discuss. 2015
11. It would have been difficult for the Constituent Assembly to complete its historic task of drafting the Constitution for Independent India in just three years but for the experience gained with the Government of India Act, 1935. Discuss. 2015
12. The third battle of Panipat was fought in 1761. Why were so many empire-shaking battles fought at Panipat? 2014
13. Examine critically the various facets of economic policies of the British in India from mid-eighteenth century till independence. 2014
14. In what ways did the naval mutiny prove to be the last nail in the coffin of British colonial aspirations in India? 2014
15. Defying the barriers of age, gender and religion, the Indian women became the torch bearer during the struggle for freedom in India. Discuss. 2013
16. Several foreigners made India their homeland and participated in various movements. Analyze their role in the Indian struggle for freedom. 2013
17. In many ways, Lord Dalhousie was the founder of modern India. Elaborate. 2013

### Modern History (Post Independence)

1. Critically discuss the objectives of Bhoodan and Gramdan movements initiated by Acharya Vinoba Bhave and their success. 2013
2. Write a critical note on the evolution and significance of the slogan “Jai Jawana Jai Kisan”. 2013
3. Discuss the contribution of Maulana Abul Kalam Azad to pre-and post-independent India. 2013
4. Analyze the circumstances that led to Tashkent Agreement in 1966. Discuss the highlights of the agreement. 2013
5. Critically examine the compulsions which prompted India to play a decisive roles in the emergence of Bangladesh. 2013
