---
date created: 2021-10-26 22:15
date updated: 2021-10-27 13:17

---

#GS-III #Agriculture

## Syllabus

- Major crops-cropping patterns in various parts of the country, different types of irrigation and irrigation systems storage, transport and marketing of agricultural produce and issues and related constraints; e-technology in the aid of farmers.
- Issues related to direct and indirect farm subsidies and minimum support prices; Public Distribution Systemobjectives, functioning, limitations, revamping; issues of buffer stocks and food security; Technology missions; economics of animal-rearing.
- Food processing and related industries in Indiascope’ and significance, location, upstream and downstream requirements, supply chain management.
- Land reforms in India.

## Booklist

## Questions

### Food: Cropping-irrigation

1. How can biotechnology improve the living standards of farmers?  2019
2. How far is the Integrated Farming System (IFS) helpful in sustaining agricultural production? 2019
3. Elaborate on the impact of the National Watershed Project in increasing agricultural production from water-stressed areas. 2019
4. How was India benefited from the contributions of Sir M.Visvesvaraya and Dr. M. S. Swaminathan in the fields of water engineering and agricultural science respectively? 2019
5. Sikkim is the first ‘Organic State’ in India. What are the ecological and economical benefits of Organic State? 2018
6. Assess the role of National Horticulture Mission (NHM) in boosting the production, productivity and income of horticulture farms. How far has it succeeded in increasing the income of farmers? 2018
7. How has the emphasis on certain crops brought about changes in cropping patterns in recent past? Elaborate the emphasis on millets production and consumption. 2018
8. What are the major reasons for declining rice and wheat yield in the cropping system? How crop diversification is helpful to stabilize the yield of the crop in the system? 2017
9. What is water-use efficiency? Describe the role of micro-irrigation in increasing the water-use efficiency. 2016
10. What is allelopathy? Discuss its role in major cropping systems of irrigated agriculture. 2016
11. Given the vulnerability of Indian agriculture to vagaries of nature, discuss the need for crop insurance and bring out the salient features of the Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) 2016

### Food: MSP

Farm subsidies and MSP and issues therein (direct and indirect); PDS (objectives, functioning, limitations, revamping, issues of buffer stocks & food security)

1. What are the reformative steps taken by the government to make food grain distribution system more effective? 2019
2. What do you mean by Minimum Support Price (MSP)? How will MSP rescue the farmers from the low income trap? 2018
3. How do subsidies affect the cropping pattern, crop diversity and economy of farmers? What is the significance of crop insurance, minimum support price and food processing for small and marginal farmers? 2017
4. “In the villages itself no form of credit organisation will be suitable except the cooperative society.” – All Indian rural credit survey. Discuss this statement in the background of agriculture finance in India. What constrain and challenges do financial institutions supplying agricultural finances? How can technology be used to better reach and serve rural clients?2014
5. Food security bill is expected to eliminate hunger and malnutrition in India. Critically discuss various apprehensions in its effective implementation along with the concerns it has generated in WTO 2013
6. What are the different types of agriculture subsidies given to farmers at the national and state levels? Critically analyze the agriculture subsidy regime with the reference to the distortions created by it. 2013

### Food: Tech. in aid of farmers

e-technology to aid farmers, Technology missions;

1. Explain various types of revolutions, took place in Agriculture after Independence in India. How these revolutions have helped in poverty alleviation and food security in India? 2017
2. How can the ‘Digital India’ programme help farmers to improve farm productivity and income? What steps has the Government taken in this regards? 2015

### Food: Food processing industry

Food processing and related industries in India (scope & significance, location, upstream-downstream requirements, supply chain management); storage, transport & marketing of agro-produce and related issues & constraints; Economics of animal-rearing

1. Elaborate on the policy taken by the government of India to meet the challenges of the food processing sector. 2019
2. Examine the role of supermarkets in supply chain management of fruits, vegetables and food items. How do they eliminate number of intermediaries? 2018
3. What are the reasons for poor acceptance of cost effective small processing unit? How the food processing unit will be helpful to uplift the socio-economic status of poor farmers? 2017
4. Livestock rearing has a big potential for providing non-farm employment and income in rural areas. Discuss suggesting suitable measures to promote this sectors in India 2015
5. In view of the declining average size of land holdings in India which has made agriculture non-viable for a majority of farmers, should contract farming and land leasing be promoted in agriculture? Critically evaluate the pros and cons. 2015
6. What are the impediments in marketing and supply chain management in industry in India? Can e-commerce help in overcoming these bottlenecks? 2015
7. There is also a point of view that agriculture produce market committees (APMCs) set up under the state acts have not only impeded the development of agriculture but also have been the cause of food inflation in India. Critically examine. 2014
8. India needs to strengthen measures to promote the pink revolution in food industry for better nutrition and health. Critically elucidate the statement. 2013

### Food: Land reforms

Land Reforms in India

1. Discuss the role of land reforms in agricultural development. Identify the factors that were responsible for the success of land reforms in India. 2016
2. Establish the relationship between land reform, agriculture productivity and elimination of poverty in Indian Economy. Discussion the difficulty in designing and implementation of the agriculture friendly land reforms in India. 2013
