---
date created: 2021-11-01 12:15
date updated: 2021-11-01 12:17

---

#GS-I #World_History

## Syllabus

**World History**

- History of the world will include events from 18th century such as industrial revolution, world wars, redrawal of national boundaries, colonization, decolonization, political philosophies like communism, capitalism, socialism etc.— their forms and effect on the society.

## Booklist

- [[@/Resources/History/NCERT-9.pdf|NCERT-9]]
- [[@/Resources/History/NCERT-10.pdf|NCERT-10]]
- [[@/Resources/History/New NCERT/NCERT-11.pdf|Themes in World History]]
- [[@/Resources/History/Mastering Modern World History by Norman Lowe.pdf|Mastering Modern World History by Norman Lowe]] (Doesn't include industrial revolution)
- [[@/Resources/History/VISION IAS GS-1 WORLD HISTORY 2020.pdf| Vision IAS World History]]

## Footnotes

## Questions

1. Why indentured labour was taken by the British from India to other colonies? Have they been able to preserve their cultural identity over there? 2018
2. What problems were germane to the decolonization process of Malay Peninsula. 2017
3. The anti-colonial struggles in West Africa were led by the new elite of Western-educated Africans. Examine. 2016
4. Why did the industrial revolution first occur in England? Discuss the quality of life of the people there during the industrialization. How does it compare with that in India at present? 2015
5. To what extent can Germany be held responsible for causing the two World Wars? Discuss critically 2015
6. What were the major political, economic and social developments in the world which motivated the anti-colonial struggle in India? 2014
7. What were the events that led to the Suez Crisis in 1956? How did it deal a final blow to Britain’s self-image as a world power? 2014
8. The New Economic Policy – 1921 of Lenin had influenced the policies adopted by India soon after independence. Evaluate. 2014
9. “Latecomer” Industrial revolution in Japan involved certain factors that were markedly different from what west had experience. 2013
10. Africa was chopped into states artificially created by accident of European competition. Analyse. 2013
11. American Revolution was an economic revolt against mercantilism. Substantiate. 2013
12. What policy instruments were deployed to contain the great economic depression? 2013
