---
date created: 2021-10-22 19:24
date updated: 2021-10-26 22:16

---

#GS-I #Sociology

## Syllabus

- Salient features of Indian Society, Diversity of India.
- Role of women and women’s organization
- Population and associated issues, poverty and developmental issues, urbanization, their problems and their remedies.
- Effects of globalization on Indian society.
- Social empowerment, communalism, regionalism & secularism.

## Booklist

- [[@/Resources/Sociology/NCERT-11.1.pdf|Introducing Sociology]]
- [[@/Resources/Sociology/NCERT-11.2.pdf|Understanding Society]]
- [[@/Resources/Sociology/NCERT-12.1.pdf|Indian Society]]
- [[@/Resources/Sociology/NCERT-12.2.pdf|Social Change and Development in India]]
- [[@/Resources/Vision IAS 2020 Mains365/social-issues-sep-sep-english-2020.pdf|Vision IAS Mains 365 Social Issues]]

## Footnotes

- Make concise notes on each topic that includes: a crisp definition, latest statistics, govt schemes, criticism of these schemes; causes of issues such as communalism and regionalism, historical and current examples, their impact on our society, and your suggestions as the way ahead. (you can get these suggestions from the internet or ARC 2 or some committee report).

## Questions

### Salient features of Indian Society; Diversity of India

### Communalism, Regionalism, Secularism; Social Empowerment

1. “Caste system is assuming new identities and associational forms. Hence, caste system cannot be eradicated in India.” Comment. 2018
2. How the Indian concept of secularism is different from the western model of secularism? Discuss. 2018
3. Communalism arises either due to power struggle or relative deprivation. Argue by giving suitable illustrations. 2018
4. The spirit tolerance and love is not only an interesting feature of Indian society from very early times, but it is also playing an important part at the present. Elaborate. 2017
5. Distinguish between religiousness/religiosity and communalism giving one example of how the former has got transformed into the latter in independent India. 2017
6. In the context of diversity of India, can it be said that the regions form cultural units rather than the States? Give reasons with examples for your viewpoint. 2017
7. What are the two major legal initiatives by the State since Independence, addressing discrimination against Scheduled Tribes (STs)? 2017
8. Has the formation of linguistic States strengthened the cause of Indian Unity? 2016
9. Why are the tribals in India referred to as the Scheduled Tribes? Indicate the major provisions enshrined in the Constitution of India for their upliftment. 2016
10. What is the basis of regionalism? Is it that unequal distribution of benefits of development on regional basis eventually promotes regionalism? Substantiate your answer. 2016
11. Mahatma Gandhi and Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, despite having divergent approaches and strategies, had a common goal of amelioration of the downtrodden. Elucidate. 2015
12. Describe any four cultural elements of diversity in India and rate their relative significance in building a national identity. 2015
13. Debate the issue of whether and how contemporary movements for assertion of Dalit identity work towards annihilation of caste. 2015
14. How do the Indian debates on secularism differ from the debates in the West?2014
15. Growing feeling of regionalism is an important factor in the generation of demand for a separate state. Discuss. 2013

### Role of women and women’s organisation

1. ‘Women’s movement in India has not addressed the issues of women of lower social strata. Substantiate your view. 2018
2. How do you explain the statistics that show that the sex ratio in Tribes in India is more favourable to women than the sex ratio among Scheduled Castes? 2015
3. How does patriarchy impact the position of a middle class working woman in India? 2014
4. Discuss the various economic and socio-cultural forces that are driving increasing feminization of agriculture in India.2014
5. Why do some of the most prosperous regions of India have an adverse sex ratio for women? Give your arguments. 2014
6. Male membership needs to be encouraged in order to make women’s organization free from gender bias. Comment. 2013

### Poverty, Population; Development and associated issues

1. ‘Despite implementation of various programmes for eradication of poverty by the government in India, poverty is still existing.’ Explain by giving reasons. 2018
2. Discuss whether formation of new states in recent times is beneficial or not for the economy of India. 2018
3. Mention core strategies for the transformation of aspirational districts in India and explain the nature of convergence, collaboration and competition for its success. 2018
4. “An essential condition to eradicate poverty is to liberate the poor from deprivation.” Substantiate this statement with suitable example. 2016
5. Critically examine whether growing population is the cause of poverty OR poverty is the main cause of population increase in India. 2015
6. Discuss the changes in the trends of labour migration within and outside India in the last four decades. 2015
7. The life cycle of a joint family depends on economic factors rather than social values. Discuss. 2014

### Globalisation (effects on Indian society)

1. ‘Globalization is generally said to promote cultural homogenization but due to this cultural specificities appear to be strengthened in the Indian Society. Elucidate. 2018
2. Discuss the positive and negative effects of globalization on women in India. (2013, Asked about Globalization effect on Elderly) 2015
3. To what extent globalization has influenced the core of cultural diversity in India? Explain. 2016
4. Critically examine the effects of globalization on the aged population in India. 2013
