---
date created: 2021-10-22 17:52
date updated: 2021-11-01 11:56

---

#GS-I #HnC #Ancient-History #Medieval-History

## Syllabus

Indian culture will cover the salient aspects of Art Forms, literature and Architecture from ancient to modern times.

## Booklist

**Ancient History**

- [[@/Resources/History/NCERT-6.pdf|NCERT-6]]
- [[@/Resources/History/New NCERT/NCERT-12.1.pdf|Themes in Indian History Part I]]
- [[@/Resources/History/Tamil Books/11.1.pdf|Ancient History (Tamil)]]

**Medieval History**

- [[@/Resources/History/NCERT-7.pdf|NCERT-7]]
- [[@/Resources/History/New NCERT/NCERT-12.2.pdf|Themes in Indian History Part II]]
- [[@/Resources/History/Tamil Books/11.2.pdf|Medieval History (Tamil)]]

**Art & Culture**

- [[@/Resources/Heritage and Culture/NCERT-11.pdf|An Introduction to Indian Art – Class XI NCERT]]
- [Centre for Cultural Resource and Training (CCRT)](http://ccrtindia.gov.in/) material
  - [Visual Art](http://ccrtindia.gov.in/visualarts.php)
  - [Performing Art](http://ccrtindia.gov.in/performingart.php)
  - [Literary Art](http://ccrtindia.gov.in/literaryarts.php)
- [[@/Resources/Heritage and Culture/Indian Art and Culture by Nitin Singhania.pdf| Indian Art and Culture by Nitin Singhania]]
- [[@/Resources/Heritage and Culture/NIOS.pdf|Culture and Heritage by NIOS]]

## Footnotes

- To do after other GS topics covered.
- Extensive use of visual memorization.

## Questions

1. Safeguarding the Indian art heritage is the need of the moment. Discuss. 2018
2. Assess the importance of the accounts of the Chinese and Arab travellers in the reconstruction of the history of India. [2018]
3. The Bhakti movement received a remarkable re-orientation with the advent of Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. Discuss. [2018]
4. How do you justify the view that the level of excellence of Gupta numismatic art is not at all noticeable in later times? [2017]
5. Early Buddhist Stupa-art, while depicting folk motifs and narratives successfully expounds Buddhist ideals. Elucidate. 2016
6. Krishnadeva Raya, the King of Vijayanagar, was not only an accomplished scholar himself but was also a great patron of learning and literature. Discuss. 2016
7. The ancient civilization in Indian sub-continent differed from those of Egypt, Mesopotamia and Greece in that its culture and traditions have been preserved without a breakdown to the present day. Comment. 2015
8. Mesolithic rock cut architecture of India not only reflects the cultural life of the times but also a tine aesthetic sense comparable to modem painting. Critically evaluate this comment. 2015
9. To what extent has the urban planning and culture of the Indus Valley Civilization provided inputs to the present day urbanization? Discuss. 2014
10. Gandhara sculpture owed as much to the Romans as to the Greeks. Explain. 2014
11. Taxila university was one of the oldest universities of the world with which were associated a number of renowned learned personalities of different disciplines. Its strategic location caused its fame to flourish, but unlike Nalanda, it is not considered as a university in the modern sense. Discuss. 2014
12. Sufis and medieval mystic saints failed to modify either the religious ideas and practices or the outward structure of Hindu / Muslim societies to any appreciable extent. Comment. 2014
13. Though not very useful from the point of view of a connected political history of South India, the Sangam literature portrays the social and economic conditions of its time with remarkable vividness. Comment. 2013
14. Discuss the Tandava dance as recorded in the early Indian inscriptions. 2013
15. Chola architecture represents a high watermark in the evolution of temple architecture. Discuss. 2013
