---
date created: 2021-10-22 19:49
date updated: 2021-10-26 16:38

---

#GS-III #Disasater_Management

## Syllabus

Disaster and Disaster Management.

## Booklist

- CBSE book
- [NDMA](https://ndma.gov.in/) Guidelines
-  [[@/Resources/Internal Security/Challenges to Internal Security of India ( Includes Disaster Management) by Ashok Kumar, Vipul Anekant .pdf|Challenges to Internal Security of India ( Includes Disaster Management) by Ashok Kumar, Vipul Anekant]](Chapter 12)

## Footnotes

- Prepare concise notes on NDMA (structure, functions, rules etc), international agreements such as Sendai Framework, latest current affairs from newspapers, internet and coaching material.
- Draw diagrams to illustrate concepts like river embankment, land zoning, watershed management etc.

## Questions

1. Disaster preparedness is the first step in any disaster management process. Explain how hazard zonation mapping will help in disaster mitigation in the case of landslides. 2019
2. Vulnerability is an essential element for defining disaster impacts and its threat to people. How and in what ways can vulnerability to disasters be characterized? Discuss different types of vulnerability with reference to disasters. 2019
3. Describe various measures taken in India for Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) before and after signing ‘Sendai Framework for DRR (2015-2030)’. How is this framework different from ‘Hyogo Framework for Action, 2005? 2018
4. On December 2004, tsumani brought havoc on 14 countries including India. Discuss the factors responsible for occurrence of Tsunami and its effects on life and economy. In the light of guidelines of NDMA (2010) describe the mechanisms for preparedness to reduce the risk during such events. 2017
5. The frequency of urban floods due to high intensity rainfall is increasing over the years. Discussing the reasons for urban floods. highlight the mechanisms for preparedness to reduce the risk during such events. 2016
6. With reference to National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) guidelines, discuss the measures to be adopted to mitigate the impact of the recent incidents of cloudbursts in many places of Uttarakhand. 2016
7. The frequency of earthquakes appears to have increased in the Indian subcontinent. However, India’s preparedness for mitigating their impact has significant gaps. Discuss various aspects. 2015
8. Drought has been recognised as a disaster in view of its party expense, temporal duration, slow onset and lasting effect on various vulnerable sections. With a focus on the September 2010 guidelines from the National disaster management authority, discuss the mechanism for preparedness to deal with the El Nino and La Nina fallouts in India. 2014
9. How important are vulnerability and risk assessment for pre-disaster management. As an administrator ,what are key areas that you would focus in a disaster management 2013
