---
date created: 2021-10-22 18:33
date updated: 2021-11-01 12:37

---

#GS-I #Geography

## Syllabus

- Salient features of world’s physical geography.
- Distribution of key natural resources across the world (including South Asia and the Indian sub-continent);
- Factors responsible for the location of primary, secondary, and tertiary sector industries in various parts of the world (including India).
- Important Geophysical phenomena such as earthquakes, Tsunami, Volcanic activity, cyclone etc., geographical features and their location;
- Changes in critical geographical features (including water-bodies and ice-caps) and in flora and fauna and the effects of such changes.

## Booklist

- [[@/Resources/Geography/NCERT-6.pdf|NCERT-6]]
- [[@/Resources/Geography/NCERT-7.pdf|NCERT-7]]
- [[@/Resources/Geography/NCERT-8.pdf|NCERT-8]]
- [[@/Resources/Geography/NCERT-9.pdf|NCERT-9]]
- [[@/Resources/Geography/NCERT-10.pdf|NCERT-10]]
- [[@/Resources/Geography/NCERT-11.1.pdf|Fundamentals of Physical Geography XI NCERT]]
- [[@/Resources/Geography/NCERT-11.2.pdf|India: Physical Environment XI NCERT]]
- [[@/Resources/Geography/NCERT-12.1.pdf|Fundamentals of Human Geography XII NCERT]]
- [[@/Resources/Geography/NCERT-12.2.pdf|India: People and Economy XII NCERT]]
- [[@/Resources/Geography/Certificate Physics and Human Geography by Goh Cheng Leong.pdf|Certificate Physical and Human Geography: GC Leong]]
- [PMF IAS Geography Playlist](https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLfhUF7AO5ZR16jjRQmHEGYw_Xi1RGsrzq) or [Mrunal Geography Playlist](https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLAMBum9_RkuNDtzpNQlCRcaOrNqrD4Gf7)

## Footnotes

## Questions

### Physical Geography

1. Why is Indian Regional Navigational Satellite System (IRNSS) needed? How does it help in navigation? 2018
2. Define mantle plume and explain its role in plate tectonics. 2018
3. How does the Juno Mission of NASA help to understand the origin and evolution of the Earth? 2017
4. “The Himalayas are highly prone to landslides.” Discuss the causes and suggest suitable measures of mitigation. 2016
5. Explain the formation of thousands of islands in Indonesian and Philippines archipelagos. 2014
6. Why are the world’s fold mountain systems located along the margins of continents? Bring out the association between the global distribution of Fold Mountains and the earthquakes and volcanoes. 2014
7. What do you understand by the theory of continental drift? Discuss the prominent evidences in its support. 2013
8. There is no formation of deltas by rivers of the Western Ghat. Why? 2013
9. Major hot deserts in northern hemisphere are located between 20-30 degree north and on the western side of the continents. Why? 2013
10. Bring out the causes for more frequent landslides in the Himalayas than in Western Ghats 2013

### Climate, Disaster related

1. What are the consequences of spreading of ‘Dead Zones’ on marine ecosystem? 2018
2. In spite of adverse environmental impact, coal mining is still inevitable for development.” Discuss. 2017
3. Mention the advantages of the cultivation of pulse because of which the year 2016 was declared as the International Year of Pulses by the United Nations. 2017
4. How does the cryosphere affect global climate? 2017
5. Account for variations in oceanic salinity and discuss its multi-dimensional effects. 2017
6. In what way can flood be converted into a sustainable source of irrigation and all-weather inland navigation in India? 2017
7. What characteristics can be assigned to monsoon climate that succeeds in feeding more than 50 percent of the won population residing in Monsoon Asia? 2017
8. Discuss the concept of air mass and explain its role in macro-climatic changes. 2016
9. Explain the factors responsible for the origin of ocean currents. How do they influence regional climates, fishing and navigation? 2015
10. How far do you agree that the behavior of the Indian monsoon has been changing due to humanizing landscapes? Discuss. 2015
11. Tropical cyclones are largely confined to South China Sea, Bay of Bengal and Gulf of Mexico. Why? 2014
12. Most of the unusual climatic happenings are explained as an outcome of the El-Nino effect. Do you agree? 2014
13. Bring out the relationship between the shrinking Himalayan glaciers and the symptoms of climate change in the Indian sub-continent.2014
14. The recent cyclone on the east coast of India was called “Phailin”. How are the tropical cyclones named across the world? 2013
15. Bring out the causes for the formation of heat islands in the urban habitat of the world. 2013
16. What do you understand by the phenomenon of temperature inversion in meteorology? How does it affect the weather and the habitants of the place? 2013

### Resources Distribution

1. Why is India taking keen interest in resources of Arctic Region? 2018
2. The effective management of land and water resources will drastically reduce the human miseries. Explain 2016
3. South China Sea has assumed great geopolitical significance in the present context. Comment. 2016
4. Present an account of the Indus Water Treaty and examine its ecological, economic and political implications in the context of changing bilateral relations. 2016
5. Enumerate the problems and prospects of inland water transport in India. 2016
6. In what way micro-watershed Development projects help in water conservation in drought prone and semi-arid regions of India. 2016
7. What are the economic significances of discovery of oil in Arctic Sea and its possible environmental consequences? 2015
8. India is well endowed with fresh water resources. Critically examine why it still suffers from water scarcity. 2015
9. The states of Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand reaching the limits of their ecological carrying capacity due to tourism. Critically evaluate. 2015
10. Critically evaluate the various resources of the oceans which can be harnessed to meet the resource crisis in the world. 2014
11. How does India see its place in the economic space of rising natural resource rich Africa? 2014
12. With growing scarcity of fossil fuels, the atomic energy is gaining more and more significance in India. Discuss the availability of raw material required for the generation of atomic energy in India and in the world. 2013
13. It is said the India has substantial reserves of shale oil and gas, which can feed the needs of country for quarter century. However, tapping of the resources doesn’t appear to be high on the agenda. Discuss critically the availability and issues involved. 2013

### Factors affecting industrial locations

1. Define blue revolution, explain the problems and strategies for pisciculture development in India. 2018
2. What is the significance of Industrial Corridors in India? Identify industrial corridors, explain their main characteristics. 2018
3. Petroleum refineries are not necessarily located nearer to crude oil producing areas, particularly in many of the developing countries. Explain its implications. 2017
4. Whereas the British planters had developed tea gardens all along the Shivaliks and Lesser Himalayas from Assam to Himachal Pradesh, in effect they did not succeed beyond the Darjeeling area. Explain. 2014
5. Account for the change in the spatial pattern of the Iron and Steel industry in the world. 2014
6. Why did the Green Revolution in India virtually by-pass the eastern region despite fertile soil and good availability of water? 2014
7. Do you agree that there is a growing trend of opening new sugar mills in the Southern states of India? Discuss with justification 2013
8. Analyze the factors for highly decentralized cotton textile industry in India 2013

### Urbanization

1. “The ideal solution of depleting ground water resources in India is water harvesting system.” How can it be made effective in urban areas? 2018
2. The growth of cities as I.T. hubs has opened up new avenues employment but has also created new problems. Substantiate this statement with examples. Urbanization 2017
3. With a brief background of quality of urban life in India, introduce the objectives and strategy of the ‘Smart City Programme’.2016
4. Major cities of India are becoming more vulnerable to flood conditions. Discuss. 2016
5. Mumbai, Delhi and Kolkata are the three mega cities of the country but the air pollution is much more serious problem in Delhi as compared to the other two. Why is this so? 2015
6. Smart cities in India cannot sustain without smart villages. Discuss this statement in the backdrop of rural urban integration. 2015
7. Discussion the various social problems which originated out of the speedy process of urbanization in India. 2013
