---
date created: 2021-10-22 19:46
date updated: 2021-10-26 22:19

---

#GS-III #Economics

## Syllabus

- Indian Economy and issues relating to planning, mobilization, of resources, growth, development and employment.
- Inclusive growth and issues arising from it.
- Government Budgeting.
- Effects of liberalization on the economy, changes in industrial policy and their effects on industrial growth.
- Infrastructure: Energy, Ports, Roads, Airports, Railways etc.
- Investment models.

## Booklist

- [[@/Resources/Economics/NCERT-11.pdf|Indian Economic Development – NCERT Class XI]]
- [[@/Resources/Economics/NCERT-12.1.pdf|Microeconomics – NCERT Class XII]]
- [[@/Resources/Economics/NCERT-12.2.pdf|Macroeconomics – NCERT Class XII]]
- [[@/Resources/Economics/Indian Economy by Ramesh Singh.pdf|Indian Economy by Ramesh Singh]]
- [[@/Resources/Vision IAS 2020 Mains365/economy-sep-sep-english-2020.pdf|Vision IAS Mains 365 Economics]]
- [Vision IAS Union Budget](http://www.visionias.in/resources/all_programs.php?c=budget)
- [Vision IAS Economic Survey](http://www.visionias.in/resources/all_programs.php?c=economic_survey)
- [Mrunal Economics Playlist 2015](https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLAMBum9_RkuPPGvD7HI9wfsDSxWwJYz94)

## Footnotes

## Questions

### Growth and Resource mobilization

1. Do you agree with the view that steady GDP growth and low inflation have left the Indian economy in good shape? Give reasons in support of your arguments.  2019
2. It is argued that the strategy of inclusive growth is intended to meet the objectives of inclusiveness and sustainability together. Comment on this statement.  2019
3. How are the principles followed by the NITI Aayog different from those followed by the erstwhile Planning Commission in India? 2018
4. Among several factors for India’s potential growth, savings rate is the most effective one. Do you agree? What are the other factors available for growth potential? 2017
5. Account for the failure of manufacturing sector in achieving the goal of labour-intensive exports rather than capital-intensive exports. Suggest measures for more labour-intensive rather than capital-intensive exports. 2017
6. What are the salient features of ‘inclusive growth’? Has India been experiencing such a growth process? Analyze and suggest measures for inclusive growth. 2017
7. Pradhan Mantri Jan-Dhan Yojana (PMJDY) is necessary for bringing unbanked to the institutional finance fold. Do you agree with this for financial inclusion of the poorer section of the Indian society? Give arguments to justify your opinion. 2016
8. Comment on the challenges for inclusive growth which include careless and useless manpower in the Indian context. Suggest measures to be taken for facing these challenges. 2016
9. The nature of economic growth in India in described as jobless growth. Do you agree with this view? Give arguments in favour of your answer. 2015
10. Craze for gold in Indians have led to a surge in import of gold in recent years and put pressure on balance of payments and external value of rupee. In view of this, examine the merits of Gold Monetization Scheme. 2015
11. Capitalism has guided the world economy to unprecedented prosperity. However, it often encourages shortsightedness and contributes to wide disparities between the rich and the poor. In this light, would it be correct to believe and adopt capitalism driving inclusive growth in India? Discuss. 2014
12. With a consideration towards the strategy of inclusive growth, the new companies bill, 2013 has indirectly made CSR a mandatory obligation. Discuss the challenges expected in its implementation in right earnest. Also discuss other provisions in the bill and their implications. 2013
13. “Success of ‘Make in India’ programme depends on the success of ‘Skill India’ programme and radical labour reforms.” Discuss with logical arguments. 2015
14. While we found India’s demographic dividend, we ignore the dropping rates of employability. What are we missing while doing so? Where will the jobs that India desperately needs come from? Explain. 2014

### Government Budgeting

1. Enumerate the indirect taxes which have been subsumed in the Goods and Services Tax (GST) in India. Also, comment on the revenue implications of the GST introduced in India since July 2017.  2019
2. The public expenditure management is a challenge to the government of India in the context of budget-making during the post-liberalization period. Clarify it.  2019
3. Comment on the important changes introduced in respect of the Long-term Capital Gains Tax (LCGT) and Dividend Distribution Tax (DDT) in the Union Budget for 2018-2019. 2018
4. One of the intended objectives of Union Budget 2017-18 is to ‘transform, energize and clean India’. Analyse the measures proposed in the Budget 2017-18 to achieve the objective. 2017
5. Women empowerment in India needs gender budgeting. What are the requirements and status of gender budgeting in the Indian context? 2016
6. In what way could replacement of price subsidy with Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) change the scenario of subsidies in India? Discuss. 2015
7. What are the reasons for introduction of Fiscal responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM) act, 2003? Discuss critically its salient features and their effectiveness. 2013
8. What is meaning of the term tax-expenditure? Taking housing sector as an example, discuss how it influences budgetary policies of the government. 2013
9. Discussion the rationale for introducing Good and services tax in India. Bring out critically the reasons for delay in roll out for its regime . 2013

### Infrastructure (energy, ports, roads, airports, railways)

### Investment models

1. With growing energy needs should India keep on expanding its nuclear energy programme? Discuss the facts and fears associated with nuclear energy. 2018
2. Access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy is the sine qua non to achieve Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Comment on the progress made in India in this regard. 2018
3. Examine the developments of Airports in India through Joint Ventures under Public-Private Partnership(PPP) model. What are the challenges faced by the authorities in this regard. 2017
4. What are ‘Smart Cities? Examine their relevance for urban development in India. Will it increase rural-urban differences? Give arguments for Smart Villages’ in the light of PURA and RURBAN Mission. 2016
5. Justify the need for FDI for the development of the Indian economy. Why there is gap between MOUs signed and actual FDIs? Suggest remedial steps to be taken for increasing actual FDIs in India. 2016
6. There is a clear acknowledgement that Special Economic Zones (SEZs) are a tool of industrial development, manufacturing and exports. Recognizing this potential, the whole instrumentality of SEZs requires augmentation. Discuss the issues plaguing the success of SEZs with respect to taxation, governing laws and administration. 2015
7. The right to fair compensation and transparency land acquisition, rehabilitation and resettlement act, 2013 has come into effect from 1 January 2014. What implication would it have on industrialisation and agriculture in India? 2014
8. National urban transport policy emphasizes on moving people instead of moving vehicles. Discuss critically the success of various strategies of the government in this regard. 2014
9. Explain how private public partnership agreements, in longer gestation infrastructure projects, can transfer unsuitable liabilities to the future. What arrangements need to be put in place to ensure that successive generations’ capacities are not compromised? 2014
10. Adaptation of PPP model for infrastructure development of the country has not been free from criticism. Critically discuss the pros and cons of the model. 2013

### Effects of Liberalisation on the economy

### Changes in Industrial policy & their effects on industrial growth

1. How would the recent phenomena of protectionism and currency manipulations in world trade affect macroeconomic stability of India? 2018
2. “Industrial growth rate has lagged behind in the overall growth of Gross-Domestic-Product(GDP) in the post-reform period” Give reasons. How far the recent changes in Industrial Policy are capable of increasing the industrial growth rate? 2017
3. How globalization has led to the reduction of employment in the formal sector of the Indian economy? Is increased informalization detrimental to the development of the country? 2016
4. Normally countries shift from agriculture to industry and then later to services, but India shifted directly from agriculture to services. What are the reasons for the huge growth of services vis-a-vis industry in the country? Can India become a developed country without a strong industrial base? 2014
5. Foreign direct investment in the defence sector is now said to be liberalised. What influence this is expected to have on Indian defence and economy in the short and long run? 2014
6. Examine the impact of liberalization on companies owned by Indian. Are the competing with the MNCs satisfactorily? 2013
7. Discuss the impact of FDI entry into multi-trade retail sector on supply chain management in commodity trade pattern of the economy. 2013
8. Though India allowed foreign direct investment (FDI) in what is called multi brand retail through joint venture route in September 2012, the FDI even after a year, has not picket up. Discuss the reasons. 2013
